import IdealImage from '@theme/IdealImage';

# CHAPTER 3

## Data Modeling Using the Entity-Relationship (ER) Model

## Overview of Database Design Process

*   Two main activities:
    *   Database design
    *   Applications design
*   Focus in this chapter on **conceptual database design**
    *   To design the conceptual schema for a database application
*   Applications design focuses on the programs and interfaces that access the database
    *   Generally considered part of software engineering

---

### A simplified diagram to illustrate the main phases of database design.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.1.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---

<div class="page-break"></div>

## Methodologies for Conceptual Design
*   Entity Relationship (ER) Diagrams (This Chapter)
*   Enhanced Entity Relationship (EER) Diagrams (Chapter 4)
*   Use of Design Tools in industry for designing and documenting large scale designs
*   The UML (Unified Modeling Language) Class Diagrams are popular in industry to document conceptual database designs

---

<div class="page-break"></div>

## Example COMPANY Database
We need to create a database schema design based on the following (simplified) **requirements** of the COMPANY Database:
*   The company is organized into DEPARTMENTS. Each department has a name, number and an employee who *manages* the department. We keep track of the start date of the department manager. A department may have several locations.
*   Each department *controls* a number of PROJECTs. Each project has a unique name, unique number and is located at a single location.


*   The database will store each EMPLOYEE's social security number, address, salary, sex, and birthdate.
    *   Each employee *works for* one department but may *work on* several projects.
    *   The DB will keep track of the number of hours per week that an employee currently works on each project.
    *   It is required to keep track of the *direct supervisor* of each employee.
*   Each employee may *have* a number of DEPENDENTs.
    *   For each dependent, the DB keeps a record of name, sex, birthdate, and relationship to the employee.

<div class="page-break"></div>

## ER Model Concepts
### Entities and Attributes
*   **Entity** is a basic concept for the ER model. Entities are specific things or objects in the mini-world that are represented in the database.
    *   For example the EMPLOYEE John Smith, the Research DEPARTMENT, the ProductX PROJECT
*   **Attributes** are properties used to describe an entity.
    *   For example an EMPLOYEE entity may have the attributes Name, SSN, Address, Sex, BirthDate
*   A specific entity will have a value for each of its attributes.
    *   For example a specific employee entity may have Name='John Smith', SSN='123456789', Address ='731, Fondren, Houston, TX', Sex='M', BirthDate='09-JAN-55'
*   Each attribute has a ***value set*** (or data type) associated with it – e.g. integer, string, date, enumerated type, ...

---

## Types of Attributes

<div style={{ 
    float: 'right',
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.2.png')}
        style={{
            width: 300,
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

*   **Simple**
    *   Each entity has a single atomic value for the attribute. For example, SSN or Sex.
*   **Composite**
    *   The attribute may be composed of several components. For example:
        *   Address(Apt#, House#, Street, City, State, ZipCode, Country), or
        *   Name(FirstName, MiddleName, LastName).
    *   Composition may form a hierarchy where some components are themselves composite.
*   **Multi-valued**
    *   An entity may have multiple values for that attribute. For example, Color of a CAR or PreviousDegrees of a STUDENT.
    *   Denoted as Color or PreviousDegrees.

*   In general, composite and multi-valued attributes may be nested arbitrarily to any number of levels, although this is rare.
    *   For example, PreviousDegrees of a STUDENT is a composite multi-valued attribute denoted by PreviousDegrees (College, Year, Degree, Field)
    *   Multiple PreviousDegrees values can exist
    *   Each has four subcomponent attributes:
        *   College, Year, Degree, Field

---

## Example of a composite attribute

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.3.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>


---
## Entity Types and Key Attributes

*   Entities with the same basic attributes are grouped or typed into an **entity type**.
    *   For example, the entity type EMPLOYEE and PROJECT.
*   An attribute of an entity type for which each entity must have a unique value is called a **key attribute** of the entity type.
    *   For example, SSN of EMPLOYEE.
*   A key attribute may be composite.
    *   VehicleTagNumber is a key of the CAR entity type with components (Number, State).
*   An entity type may have more than one key.
    *   The CAR entity type may have two keys:
        *   VehicleIdentificationNumber (popularly called VIN)
        *   VehicleTagNumber (Number, State), aka license plate number.
*   **Each key is underlined** (Note: this is different from the relational schema where only one "primary key" is underlined).


---

## Entity Set

*(Diagram showing CAR entity with attributes: State, Number (part of Registration composite attribute which is a key), Vehicle_id (key), Year, Make, Model, Color (multivalued attribute).)*

*   Each entity type will have a collection of entities stored in the database
    *   Called the **entity set** or sometimes **entity collection**
*   Previous slide shows three CAR entity instances in the entity set for CAR
*   Same name (CAR) used to refer to both the entity type and the entity set
*   However, entity type and entity set may be given different names
*   Entity set is the current *state* of the entities of that type that are stored in the database

---

## Value Sets (Domains) of Attributes

*   Each simple attribute is associated with a **value set**
    *   E.g., Lastname has a value which is a character string of upto 15 characters, say
    *   Date has a value consisting of MM-DD-YYYY where each letter is an integer
*   A **value set** specifies the set of values associated with an attribute

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Displaying an Entity type

<div style={{ 
    float: 'right',
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.2.png')}
        style={{
            width: 300,
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>


*   In ER diagrams, an entity type is displayed in a rectangular box
*   Attributes are displayed in ovals
    *   Each attribute is connected to its entity type
    *   Components of a composite attribute are connected to the oval representing the composite attribute
    *   Each key attribute is underlined
    *   Multivalued attributes displayed in double ovals
*   See the full ER notation in advance on the next slide

---

## NOTATION for ER diagrams

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.4.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>


**Summary of the notation for ER diagrams:**

| Symbol Description                     | Meaning                     |
| :------------------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| Rectangle                              | Entity                      |
| Double Rectangle                       | Weak Entity                 |
| Diamond                                | Relationship                |
| Double Diamond                         | Identifying Relationship    |
| Oval                                   | Attribute                   |
| Oval with underlined text              | Key Attribute               |
| Double Oval                            | Multivalued Attribute       |
| Oval connected to other ovals          | Composite Attribute         |
| Dashed Oval                            | Derived Attribute           |
| Line connecting E1-R-E2 (E2 double line) | Total Participation of E₂ in R |
| Line E₁ --1-- R --N-- E₂               | Cardinality Ratio 1:N for E₁:E₂ in R |
| Line --(min, max)-- R -- E             | Structural Constraint (min, max) on Participation of E in R |

---


## Entity Type CAR with two keys and a corresponding Entity Set

**Figure 3.7** The CAR entity type with two key attributes, Registration and Vehicle_id. (a) ER diagram notation. (b) Entity set with three entities.

**(a)**

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.2.png')}
        style={{
            width: 300,
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

**(b)**
**CAR**
Registration (Number, State), Vehicle_id, Make, Model, Year, Color

*   **CAR₁**
    ((ABC 123, TEXAS), TK629, Ford Mustang, convertible, 2004 red, black)
*   **CAR₂**
    ((ABC 123, NEW YORK), WP9872, Nissan Maxima, 4-door, 2005, blue)
*   **CAR₃**
    ((VSY 720, TEXAS), TD729, Chrysler LeBaron, 4-door, 2002, white, blue)
*   ...

---

<div class="page-break"></div>

## Example COMPANY Database

We need to create a database schema design based on the following (simplified) **requirements** of the COMPANY Database:

*   The company is organized into DEPARTMENTS. Each department has a name, number and an employee who *manages* the department. We keep track of the start date of the department manager. A department may have several locations.
*   Each department *controls* a number of PROJECTs. Each project has a unique name, unique number and is located at a single location.
*   The database will store each EMPLOYEE's social security number, address, salary, sex, and birthdate.
    *   Each employee *works for* one department but may *work on* several projects.
    *   The DB will keep track of the number of hours per week that an employee currently works on each project.
    *   It is required to keep track of the *direct supervisor* of each employee.
*   Each employee may *have* a number of DEPENDENTs.
    *   For each dependent, the DB keeps a record of name, sex, birthdate, and relationship to the employee.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Initial Conceptual Design of Entity Types for the COMPANY Database Schema

*   Based on the requirements, we can identify four initial entity types in the COMPANY database:
    *   DEPARTMENT
    *   PROJECT
    *   EMPLOYEE
    *   DEPENDENT
*   Their initial conceptual design is shown on the following slide
*   The initial attributes shown are derived from the requirements description

---

## Initial Design of Entity Types: EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, PROJECT, DEPENDENT

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.5.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>


---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Refining the initial design by introducing relationships

*   The initial design is typically not complete
*   Some aspects in the requirements will be represented as **relationships**
*   ER model has three main concepts:
    *   Entities (and their entity types and entity sets)
    *   Attributes (simple, composite, multivalued)
    *   Relationships (and their relationship types and relationship sets)
*   We introduce relationship concepts next

---

## Relationships and Relationship Types (1)

*   A **relationship** relates two or more distinct entities with a specific meaning.
    *   For example, EMPLOYEE John Smith *works on* the ProductX PROJECT, or EMPLOYEE Franklin Wong *manages* the Research DEPARTMENT.
*   Relationships of the same type are grouped or typed into a **relationship type**.
    *   For example, the WORKS_ON relationship type in which EMPLOYEEs and PROJECTs participate, or the MANAGES relationship type in which EMPLOYEEs and DEPARTMENTS participate.
*   The **degree** of a relationship type is the number of participating entity types.
    *   Both MANAGES and WORKS_ON are *binary relationships*.

---



## Relationship instances of the WORKS_FOR N:1 relationship between EMPLOYEE and DEPARTMENT

**Figure 3.9** Some instances in the WORKS_FOR relationship set, which represents a relationship type WORKS_FOR between EMPLOYEE and DEPARTMENT.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.6.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---

## Relationship instances of the M:N WORKS_ON relationship between EMPLOYEE and PROJECT

**Figure 3.13** An M:N relationship, WORKS_ON.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.7.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>


---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Relationship type vs. relationship set (1)

*   **Relationship Type:**
    *   Is the schema description of a relationship
    *   Identifies the relationship name and the participating entity types
    *   Also identifies certain relationship constraints
*   **Relationship Set:**
    *   The current set of relationship instances represented in the database
    *   The current *state* of a relationship type
*   Previous figures displayed the relationship sets
*   Each instance in the set relates individual participating entities – one from each participating entity type
*   In ER diagrams, we represent the *relationship type* as follows:
    *   Diamond-shaped box is used to display a relationship type
    *   Connected to the participating entity types via straight lines
    *   Note that the relationship type is not shown with an arrow. The name should be typically be readable from left to right and top to bottom.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Refining the COMPANY database schema by introducing relationships

*   By examining the requirements, six relationship types are identified
*   All are *binary relationships* (degree 2)
*   Listed below with their participating entity types:
    *   WORKS_FOR (between EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT)
    *   MANAGES (also between EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT)
    *   CONTROLS (between DEPARTMENT, PROJECT)
    *   WORKS_ON (between EMPLOYEE, PROJECT)
    *   SUPERVISION (between EMPLOYEE (as subordinate), EMPLOYEE (as supervisor))
    *   DEPENDENTS_OF (between EMPLOYEE, DEPENDENT)

---

## ER DIAGRAM – Relationship Types are: WORKS_FOR, MANAGES, WORKS_ON, CONTROLS, SUPERVISION, DEPENDENTS_OF

**Figure 3.2** An ER schema diagram for the COMPANY database. The diagrammatic notation is introduced gradually throughout this chapter.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.8.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---

## Discussion on Relationship Types

*   In the refined design, some attributes from the initial entity types are refined into relationships:
    *   Manager of DEPARTMENT -> MANAGES
    *   Works_on of EMPLOYEE -> WORKS_ON
    *   Department of EMPLOYEE -> WORKS_FOR
    *   etc
*   In general, more than one relationship type can exist between the same participating entity types
    *   MANAGES and WORKS_FOR are distinct relationship types between **EMPLOYEE** and **DEPARTMENT**
    *   Different meanings and different relationship instances.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Constraints on Relationships

*   **Constraints on Relationship Types**
    *   (Also known as ratio constraints)
    *   **Cardinality Ratio** (specifies *maximum* participation)
        *   One-to-one (1:1)
        *   One-to-many (1:N) or Many-to-one (N:1)
        *   Many-to-many (M:N)
    *   **Existence Dependency Constraint** (specifies *minimum* participation) (also called participation constraint)
        *   zero (optional participation, not existence-dependent)
        *   one or more (mandatory participation, existence-dependent)

---


## Many-to-one (N:1) Relationship

**Figure 3.9** Some instances in the WORKS_FOR relationship set, which represents a relationship type WORKS_FOR between EMPLOYEE and DEPARTMENT.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.9.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---

## Many-to-many (M:N) Relationship

**Figure 3.13** An M:N relationship, WORKS_ON.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.10.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Recursive Relationship Type

*   A relationship type between the same participating entity type in *distinct roles*
*   Also called a *self-referencing* relationship type.
*   Example: the SUPERVISION relationship
*   EMPLOYEE participates twice in two distinct roles:
    *   *supervisor* (or boss) role
    *   *supervisee* (or subordinate) role
*   Each relationship instance relates two distinct EMPLOYEE entities:
    *   One employee in *supervisor* role
    *   One employee in *supervisee* role

---

## Displaying a recursive relationship

*   In a recursive relationship type.
    *   Both participations are same entity type in different roles.
    *   For example, SUPERVISION relationships between EMPLOYEE (in role of supervisor or boss) and (another) EMPLOYEE (in role of subordinate or worker).
*   In following figure, first role participation labeled with 1 and second role participation labeled with 2.
*   In ER diagram, need to display role names to distinguish participations.

---


## A Recursive Relationship Supervision

**Figure 3.11** A recursive relationship SUPERVISION between EMPLOYEE in the *supervisor* role (1) and EMPLOYEE in the *subordinate* role (2).

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.11.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>


---

## Recursive Relationship Type is: SUPERVISION (participation role names are shown)

**Figure 3.2** An ER schema diagram for the COMPANY database. The diagrammatic notation is introduced gradually throughout this chapter.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.12.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>


---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Weak Entity Types

*   An entity that does not have a key attribute and that is *identification-dependent* on another entity type.
*   A weak entity must participate in an identifying relationship type with an owner or identifying entity type
*   Entities are identified by the combination of:
    *   A *partial key* of the weak entity type
    *   The particular entity they are related to in the identifying relationship type
*   **Example:**
    *   A DEPENDENT entity is identified by the dependent's first name, *and* the specific EMPLOYEE with whom the dependent is related
    *   Name of DEPENDENT is the *partial key*
    *   DEPENDENT is a *weak entity type*
    *   EMPLOYEE is its *identifying entity type* via the identifying relationship type DEPENDENT_OF

---

## Attributes of Relationship types

*   A relationship type can have attributes:
    *   For example, HoursPerWeek of WORKS_ON
    *   Its value for each relationship instance describes the number of hours per week that an EMPLOYEE works on a PROJECT.
        *   A value of HoursPerWeek depends on a particular (employee, project) combination
*   Most relationship attributes are used with M:N relationships
    *   In 1:N relationships, they can be transferred to the entity type on the N-side of the relationship

---

<div class="page-break"></div>

## Example Attribute of a Relationship Type: Hours of WORKS_ON

**Figure 3.2** An ER schema diagram for the COMPANY database. The diagrammatic notation is introduced gradually throughout this chapter.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.13.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Notation for Constraints on Relationships

*   **Cardinality ratio** (of a binary relationship): 1:1, 1:N, N:1, or M:N
    *   Shown by placing appropriate numbers on the relationship edges.
*   **Participation constraint** (on each participating entity type): total (called existence dependency) or partial.
    *   Total shown by double line, partial by single line.
*   NOTE: These are easy to specify for Binary Relationship Types.

---

## Alternative (min, max) notation for relationship structural constraints:

*   Specified on each participation of an entity type E in a relationship type R
*   Specifies that each entity e in E participates in at least *min* and at most *max* relationship instances in R
*   Default (no constraint): min=0, max=n (signifying no limit)
*   Must have min ≤ max, min≥0, max ≥1
*   Derived from the knowledge of mini-world constraints
*   **Examples:**
    *   A department has exactly one manager and an employee can manage at most one department.
        *   Specify (0,1) for participation of EMPLOYEE in MANAGES
        *   Specify (1,1) for participation of DEPARTMENT in MANAGES
    *   An employee can work for exactly one department, but a department can have any number of employees.
        *   Specify (1,1) for participation of EMPLOYEE in WORKS_FOR
        *   Specify (0,n) for participation of DEPARTMENT in WORKS_FOR

---

## The (min, max) notation for relationship constraints

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.14.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

Read the min,max numbers next to the entity type and looking **away from** the entity type 

---

## COMPANY ER Schema Diagram using (min, max) notation

**Figure 3.15** ER diagrams for the company schema, with structural constraints specified using (min, max) notation and role names.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.15.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Alternative diagrammatic notation

*   ER diagrams is one popular example for displaying database schemas
*   Many other notations exist in the literature and in various database design and modeling tools
*   Appendix A illustrates some of the alternative notations that have been used
*   UML class diagrams is representative of another way of displaying ER concepts that is used in several commercial design tools

---

<div class="page-break"></div>

## Summary of notation for ER diagrams

**Figure 3.14** Summary of the notation for ER diagrams.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.16.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

| Symbol Description                     | Meaning                     |
| :------------------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| Rectangle                              | Entity                      |
| Double Rectangle                       | Weak Entity                 |
| Diamond                                | Relationship                |
| Double Diamond                         | Identifying Relationship    |
| Oval                                   | Attribute                   |
| Oval with underlined text              | Key Attribute               |
| Double Oval                            | Multivalued Attribute       |
| Oval connected to other ovals          | Composite Attribute         |
| Dashed Oval                            | Derived Attribute           |
| Line connecting E1-R-E2 (E2 double line) | Total Participation of E₂ in R |
| Line E₁ --1-- R --N-- E₂               | Cardinality Ratio 1:N for E₁:E₂ in R |
| Line --(min, max)-- R -- E             | Structural Constraint (min, max) on Participation of E in R |


---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## UML class diagrams

*   Represent classes (similar to entity types) as large rounded boxes with three sections:
    *   Top section includes entity type (class) name
    *   Second section includes attributes
    *   Third section includes class operations (operations are not in basic ER model)
*   Relationships (called associations) represented as lines connecting the classes
    *   Other UML terminology also differs from ER terminology
*   Used in database design and object-oriented software design
*   UML has many other types of diagrams for software design

---

## UML class diagram for COMPANY database schema

**Figure 3.16** The COMPANY conceptual schema in UML class diagram notation.
*(Left side of the slide shows a UML Class Diagram for the COMPANY schema.)*

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.17.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---

### UML class diagram Notation

#### Attributes:

*   Attributes can have domains or data types specified after a colon, data type specified like `Bdate: Date`, domain specified like `Sex: (M, F)`
*   **Composite attributes** are modeled as structured domains (e.g., Name with Fname, Minit, Lname).
*   **Multivalued attributes** (e.g., Locations) are modeled as separate classes (e.g., LOCATION class).

---

#### Associations:

*   In UML, relationship types are called *associations*, and relationship instances are called *links*.
*   A *binary association* (binary relationship) is represented as a line connecting two classes.
*   Relationship attributes (called *link attributes*) are placed in a box connected to the association line by a dashed line (e.g., Start_date and Hours in Figure 3.16).
*   **Unidirectional vs. Bidirectional Associations:**
    *   *Unidirectional*: An arrow indicates that only one direction for accessing related objects is needed.
    *   *Bidirectional*: No arrow is displayed, and it is the default.
    *   Example: The MANAGES association could be unidirectional if we always access the manager from the DEPARTMENT object.

---

#### Multiplicities:

*   Multiplicities in UML are similar to the (min, max) notation in ER diagrams.
*   They are specified in the form min..max, where \* indicates no maximum limit.
*   Example: `1..*` means at least one, with no upper limit.
*   Multiplicities are placed at the **opposite ends** of the relationship compared to ER diagrams. (Meaning, the multiplicity near a class defines the constraint on instances of *that* class participating in the association).

---

#### Aggregation:

*   Aggregation represents a *whole-part relationship* (e.g., a department and its locations).
*   It is represented by a diamond shape on the side of the whole (e.g., DEPARTMENT and LOCATION in Figure 3.16).
*   Aggregation and association do not have different structural properties, so the choice between them is somewhat subjective.

---

#### Weak Entities in UML:

*   Weak entities in UML are modeled using *qualified associations* (or *qualified aggregations*).
*   The partial key (*discriminator*) is placed in a box attached to the owner class.
*   Example: The DEPENDENT class is a weak entity, and its partial key Dependent_name is the discriminator.
*   The qualified association represents both the identifying relationship and the partial key.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Other alternative diagrammatic notations

**Figure A.1** Alternative notations.
(a) Symbols for entity type/class, attribute, and relationship.
(b) Displaying attributes.
(c) Displaying cardinality ratios.
(d) Various (min, max) notations.
(e) Notations for displaying specialization/generalization.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.18.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Relationships of Higher Degree

*   Relationship types of degree 2 are called *binary*
*   Relationship types of degree 3 are called *ternary* and of degree n are called *n-ary*
*   In general, an n-ary relationship is not equivalent to n binary relationships
*   Constraints are harder to specify for higher-degree relationships (n > 2) than for binary relationships

---

## Discussion of n-ary relationships (n > 2)

*   In general, 3 binary relationships can represent different information than a single ternary relationship (see Figure 3.17a and b on next slide)
*   If needed, the binary and n-ary relationships can all be included in the schema design (see Figure 3.17a and b, where all relationships convey different meanings)
*   In some cases, a ternary relationship can be represented as a weak entity if the data model allows a weak entity type to have multiple identifying relationships (and hence multiple owner entity types) (see Figure 3.17c)

---

## Example of a ternary relationship

**Figure 3.17** Ternary relationship types.
(a) The SUPPLY relationship.
(b) Three binary relationships not equivalent to SUPPLY.
(c) SUPPLY represented as a weak entity type.

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.19.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Another Example: A UNIVERSITY Database

*   To keep track of the enrollments in classes and student grades, another database is to be designed.
*   It keeps track of the COLLEGEs, DEPARTMENTs within each college, the COURSEs offered by departments, and SECTIONs of courses, INSTRUCTORs who teach the sections etc.
*   These entity types and the relationships among these entity types are shown on the next slide in Figure 3.20.

---

## UNIVERSITY database conceptual schema

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.20.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---

## Another example

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.21.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---

## Another example

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.22.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---

## Another example

<div style={{ 
    margin: '0 2rem 1rem 0',
    background: 'transparent',
    display: 'flex',
    justifyContent: 'center',
    alignItems: 'center',
}}>
    <IdealImage
        img={require('@site/static/img/3/3.23.png')}
        style={{
            objectFit: 'cover',
            borderRadius: '8px',
        }}
    />
</div>

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Chapter Summary

*   ER Model Concepts: Entities, attributes, relationships
*   Constraints in the ER model
*   Using ER in step-by-step mode conceptual schema design for the COMPANY database
*   ER Diagrams - Notation
*   Alternative Notations – UML class diagrams, others
*   Binary Relationship types and those of higher degree.