---
title: "9. Relational Database Design by ER- and EERR-to-Relational Mapping"
---

import IdealImage from '@theme/IdealImage';

#

### Relational Database Design by ER- and EERR-to-Relational Mapping

### Chapter Outline

*   **ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm**
    *   Step 1: Mapping of Regular Entity Types
    *   Step 2: Mapping of Weak Entity Types
    *   Step 3: Mapping of Binary 1:1 Relation Types
    *   Step 4: Mapping of Binary 1:N Relationship Types.
    *   Step 5: Mapping of Binary M:N Relationship Types.
    *   Step 6: Mapping of Multivalued attributes.
    *   Step 7: Mapping of N-ary Relationship Types.
*   **Mapping EER Model Constructs to Relations**
    *   Step 8: Options for Mapping Specialization or Generalization.
    *   Step 9: Mapping of Union Types (Categories).

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

### GOALS during Mapping

*   Preserve all information (that includes all attributes)
*   Maintain the constraints to the extent possible (Relational Model cannot preserve all contstraints- e.g., max cardinality ratio such as 1:10 in ER; exhaustive classification into subtypes, e.g., STUDENTS are specialized into Domestic and Foreign)
*   Minimize null values

*The mapping procedure described has been implemented in many commercial tools.*

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm

### ■ Step 1: Mapping of Regular Entity Types.
*   For each regular (strong) entity type E in the ER schema, create a relation R that includes all the simple attributes of E.
*   Choose one of the key attributes of E as the primary key for R.
*   If the chosen key of E is composite, the set of simple attributes that form it will together form the primary key of R.

■ **Example**: We create the relations EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, and PROJECT in the relational schema corresponding to the regular entities in the ER diagram.
*   SSN, DNUMBER, and PNUMBER are the primary keys for the relations EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, and PROJECT as shown.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**Figure 9.1 The ER conceptual schema diagram for the COMPANY database.**

```
EMPLOYEE
Fname Minit Lname Ssn Bdate Address Sex Salary Super_ssn Dno

DEPARTMENT
Dname Dnumber Mgr_ssn Mgr_start_date

DEPT_LOCATIONS
Dnumber Dlocation

PROJECT
Pname Pnumber Plocation Dnum

WORKS_ON
Essn Pno Hours

DEPENDENT
Essn Dependent_name Sex Bdate Relationship
```

**Figure 9.1 The ER conceptual schema diagram for the COMPANY database.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.)

### ■ Step 2: Mapping of Weak Entity Types
*   For each weak entity type W in the ER schema with owner entity type E, create a relation R & include all simple attributes (or simple components of composite attributes) of W as attributes of R.
*   Also, include as foreign key attributes of R the primary key attribute(s) of the relation(s) that correspond to the owner entity type(s).
*   The primary key of R is the *combination* of the primary key(s) of the owner(s) and the partial key of the weak entity type W, if any.

■ **Example**: Create the relation DEPENDENT in this step to correspond to the weak entity type DEPENDENT.
*   Include the primary key SSN of the EMPLOYEE relation as a foreign key attribute of DEPENDENT (renamed to ESSN).
*   The primary key of the DEPENDENT relation is the combination `{ESSN, DEPENDENT_NAME}` because DEPENDENT_NAME is the partial key of DEPENDENT.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.)

### Step 3: Mapping of Binary 1:1 Relation Types
*   For each binary 1:1 relationship type R in the ER schema, identify the relations S and T that correspond to the entity types participating in R.

■ **There are three possible approaches:**
1.  **Foreign Key (2 relations) approach**: Choose one of the relations-say S-and include a foreign key in S the primary key of T. It is better to choose an entity type with total participation in R in the role of S.
    *   Example: 1:1 relation MANAGES is mapped by choosing the participating entity type DEPARTMENT to serve in the role of S, because its participation in the MANAGES relationship type is total.
2.  **Merged relation (1 relation) option**: An alternate mapping of a 1:1 relationship type is possible by merging the two entity types and the relationship into a single relation. This may be appropriate when both participations are total.
3.  **Cross-reference or relationship relation (3 relations) option**: The third alternative is to set up a third relation R for the purpose of cross-referencing the primary keys of the two relations S and T representing the entity types.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.)

### ■ Step 4: Mapping of Binary 1:N Relationship Types.
*   For each regular binary 1:N relationship type R, identify the relation S that represent the participating entity type at the N-side of the relationship type.
*   Include as foreign key in S the primary key of the relation T that represents the other entity type participating in R.
*   Include any simple attributes of the 1:N relation type as attributes of S.

■ **Example**: 1:N relationship types WORKS_FOR, CONTROLS, and SUPERVISION in the figure.
*   For WORKS_FOR we include the primary key DNUMBER of the DEPARTMENT relation as foreign key in the EMPLOYEE relation and call it DNO.

■ An alternative approach is to use a Relationship relation (cross referencing relation) – this is rarely done.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.)

### Step 5: Mapping of Binary M:N Relationship Types.
*   For each regular binary M:N relationship type R, *create a new relation S* to represent R. This is a *relationship relation*.
*   Include as foreign key attributes in S the primary keys of the relations that represent the participating entity types; *their combination will form the primary key* of S.
*   Also include any simple attributes of the M:N relationship type (or simple components of composite attributes) as attributes of S.

■ **Example**: The M:N relationship type WORKS_ON from the ER diagram is mapped by creating a relation WORKS_ON in the relational database schema.
*   The primary keys of the PROJECT and EMPLOYEE relations are included as foreign keys in WORKS_ON and renamed PNO and ESSN, respectively.
*   Attribute HOURS in WORKS_ON represents the HOURS attribute of the relation type. The primary key of the WORKS_ON relation is the combination of the foreign key attributes `{ESSN, PNO}`.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.)

### Step 6: Mapping of Multivalued attributes.
*   For each multivalued attribute A, create a new relation R.
*   This relation R will include an attribute corresponding to A, plus the primary key attribute K-as a foreign key in R-of the relation that represents the entity type of relationship type that has A as an attribute.
*   The primary key of R is the combination of A and K. If the multivalued attribute is composite, we include its simple components.

■ **Example**: The relation DEPT_LOCATIONS is created.
*   The attribute DLOCATION represents the multivalued attribute LOCATIONS of DEPARTMENT, while DNUMBER-as foreign key-represents the primary key of the DEPARTMENT relation.
*   The primary key of R is the combination of `{DNUMBER, DLOCATION}`.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.)

### Step 7: Mapping of N-ary Relationship Types.
*   For each n-ary relationship type R, where n>2, create a new relationship S to represent R.
*   Include as foreign key attributes in S the primary keys of the relations that represent the participating entity types.
*   Also include any simple attributes of the n-ary relationship type (or simple components of composite attributes) as attributes of S.

■ **Example**: The relationship type SUPPY in the ER on the next slide.
*   This can be mapped to the relation SUPPLY shown in the relational schema, whose primary key is the combination of the three foreign keys `{SNAME, PARTNO, PROJNAME}`

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**Figure 9.2 Result of mapping the COMPANY ER schema into a relational database schema.**

```
EMPLOYEE
Fname Minit Lname Ssn Bdate Address Sex Salary Super_ssn Dno

DEPARTMENT
Dname Dnumber Mgr_ssn Mgr_start_date

DEPT_LOCATIONS
Dnumber Dlocation

PROJECT
Pname Pnumber Plocation Dnum

WORKS_ON
Essn Pno Hours

DEPENDENT
Essn Dependent_name Sex Bdate Relationship
```

**Figure 9.2 Result of mapping the COMPANY ER schema into a relational database schema.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**FIGURE 3.17 TERNARY RELATIONSHIP: SUPPLY**
(a)
**FIGURE 3.17 TERNARY RELATIONSHIP: SUPPLY (a)**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

### Mapping the *n*-ary relationship type SUPPLY

**Mapping the n-ary relationship type SUPPLY showing SUPPLIER, PROJECT, PART, and SUPPLY relations**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

### Summary of Mapping constructs and constraints

**Table 9.1 Correspondence between ER and Relational Models**

| ER MODEL                     | RELATIONAL MODEL                           |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| Entity type                  | Entity relation                            |
| 1:1 or 1:N relationship type | Foreign key (or *relationship relation*)   |
| M:N relationship type        | *Relationship relation* and *two* foreign keys |
| *n*-ary relationship type    | *Relationship relation* and *n* foreign keys |
| Simple attribute             | Attribute                                  |
| Composite attribute          | Set of simple component attributes         |
| Multivalued attribute        | Relation and foreign key                   |
| Value set                    | Domain                                     |
| Key attribute                | Primary (or secondary) key                 |

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Mapping of Generalization and Specialization Hierarchies to a Relational Schema

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Mapping EER Model Constructs to Relations

### Step8: Options for Mapping Specialization or Generalization.
*   Convert each specialization with m subclasses `{S1, S2,....,Sm}` and generalized superclass C, where the attributes of C are `{k,a1,...an}` and k is the (primary) key, into relational schemas using one of the four following options:
    *   **Option 8A**: Multiple relations-Superclass and subclasses
    *   **Option 8B**: Multiple relations-Subclass relations only
    *   **Option 8C**: Single relation with one type attribute
    *   **Option 8D**: Single relation with multiple type attributes

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Mapping EER Model Constructs to Relations

### ■ Option 8A: Multiple relations-Superclass and subclasses
*   Create a relation L for C with attributes Attrs(L) = `{k,a1,...an}` and PK(L) = k. Create a relation Li for each subclass Si, 1 < i < m, with the attributes Attrs(Li) = `{k}` U `{attributes of Si}` and PK(Li)=k. This option works for any specialization (total or partial, disjoint of over-lapping).

### ■ Option 8B: Multiple relations-Subclass relations only
*   Create a relation Li for each subclass Si, 1 < i < m, with the attributes Attr(Li) = `{attributes of Si}` U `{k,a1...,an}` and PK(Li) = k. This option only works for a specialization whose subclasses are total (every entity in the superclass must belong to (at least) one of the subclasses).

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Mapping EER Model Constructs to Relations (contd.)

### ■ Option 8C: Single relation with one type attribute
*   Create a single relation L with attributes Attrs(L) = `{k,a₁,...an}` U `{attributes of S₁}` U...U `{attributes of Sm}` U `{t}` and PK(L) = k. The attribute t is called a type (or **discriminating**) attribute that indicates the subclass to which each tuple belongs.

### ■ Option 8D: Single relation with multiple type attributes
*   Create a single relation schema L with attributes Attrs(L) = `{k,a₁,...an}` U `{attributes of S₁}` U...U `{attributes of Sm}` U `{t₁, t₂,...,tm}` and PK(L) = k. Each tᵢ, 1 < i < m, is a Boolean type attribute indicating whether a tuple belongs to the subclass Sᵢ.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**FIGURE 4.4 EER diagram notation for an attribute-defined specialization on JobType.**

**FIGURE 4.4 EER diagram notation for an attribute-defined specialization on JobType.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

### Mapping the EER schema in Figure 4.4 using option 8A

(a)
**Mapping of EER schema Figure 4.4 using option 8A showing EMPLOYEE, SECRETARY, TECHNICIAN, and ENGINEER relations**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

### Mapping the EER schema in Figure 4.4 using option 8C

(c)
**Mapping of EER schema Figure 4.4 using option 8C showing EMPLOYEE relation with all subclass attributes**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**FIGURE 4.3 (b) Generalizing CAR and TRUCK into the superclass VEHICLE.**

(a)
**Diagram (a) showing CAR and TRUCK as separate entities before generalization**

(b)
**Diagram (b) showing CAR and TRUCK generalized into VEHICLE superclass**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

### Mapping the EER schema in Figure 4.3b using option 8B.

(b)
**Mapping of EER schema Figure 4.3b using option 8B showing CAR and TRUCK relations with inherited attributes from VEHICLE**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**FIGURE 4.5 An overlapping (non-disjoint) specialization.**

**FIGURE 4.5 An overlapping (non-disjoint) specialization of PART into MANUFACTURED_PART and PURCHASED_PART.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

### Mapping Figure 4.5 using option 8D with Boolean type fields Mflag and Pflag.

(d)
**Mapping of Figure 4.5 using option 8D showing PART relation with Mflag and Pflag Boolean fields**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

### Different Options for Mapping Generalization Hierarchies

*   **Next Slide :Figure 9.5** Options for mapping specialization or generalization.
    *   (a) Mapping the EER schema in Figure 4.4 using option 8A.
*   (b) Mapping the EER schema in Figure 4.3(b) using option 8B.
*   (c) Mapping the EER schema in Figure 4.4 using option 8C.
*   (d) Mapping Figure 4.5 using option 8D with Boolean type fields Mflag and Pflag.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**Fig. 9.5: Different Options for Mapping Generalization Hierarchies - summary**

**Fig. 9.5: Summary of different options for mapping generalization hierarchies. (a) EMPLOYEE, SECRETARY, TECHNICIAN, ENGINEER relations (Option 8A). (b) CAR, TRUCK relations (Option 8B). (c) EMPLOYEE relation (Option 8C). (d) PART relation (Option 8D).**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Mapping EER Model Constructs to Relations (contd.)

### ■ Mapping of Shared Subclasses (Multiple Inheritance)
*   A shared subclass, such as STUDENT_ASSISTANT, is a subclass of several classes, indicating multiple inheritance. These classes must all have the same key attribute; otherwise, the shared subclass would be modeled as a category.
*   We can apply any of the options discussed in Step 8 to a shared subclass, subject to the restriction discussed in Step 8 of the mapping algorithm. Below both 8C and 8D are used for the shared class STUDENT_ASSISTANT.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**FIGURE 4.7 A specialization lattice with multiple inheritance for a UNIVERSITY database.**

**FIGURE 4.7 A specialization lattice showing multiple inheritance for PERSON, EMPLOYEE, ALUMNUS, STUDENT, STAFF, FACULTY, STUDENT_ASSISTANT, GRADUATE_STUDENT, UNDERGRADUATE_STUDENT, RESEARCH_ASSISTANT, TEACHING_ASSISTANT in a UNIVERSITY database.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**FIGURE 9.6 Mapping the EER specialization lattice in Figure 4.7 using multiple options.**

**FIGURE 9.6 Relational schema mapping of the EER specialization lattice from Figure 4.7, showing PERSON, EMPLOYEE, ALUMNUS, ALUMNUS_DEGREES, and STUDENT relations.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Mapping EER Model Constructs to Relations (contd.)

### ■ Step 9: Mapping of Union Types (Categories).
*   For mapping a category whose defining superclass have different keys, it is customary to specify a new key attribute, called a surrogate key, when creating a relation to correspond to the category.
*   In the example below we can create a relation OWNER to correspond to the OWNER category and include any attributes of the category in this relation. The primary key of the OWNER relation is the surrogate key, which we called Ownerld.

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**FIGURE 4.8 Two categories (union types): OWNER and REGISTERED_VEHICLE.**

**FIGURE 4.8 EER diagram showing two categories (union types): OWNER (union of PERSON, BANK, COMPANY) and REGISTERED_VEHICLE (union of CAR, TRUCK).**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

**FIGURE 9.7 Mapping the EER categories (union types) in Figure 4.8 to relations.**

**FIGURE 9.7 Relational schema mapping of EER categories from Figure 4.8, showing PERSON, BANK, COMPANY, OWNER, REGISTERED_VEHICLE, CAR, TRUCK, and OWNS relations.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Mapping Exercise-1

**Exercise 9.4: Map this schema into a set of relations.**

**FIGURE 9.8 An ER schema for a SHIP_TRACKING database.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Mapping Exercise-2

**Exercise 9.9 : Map this schema into a set of relations**

**FIGURE 9.9 EER diagram for a car dealer.**

---
<div class="page-break"></div>

## Chapter Summary

*   **ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm**
    *   Step 1: Mapping of Regular Entity Types
    *   Step 2: Mapping of Weak Entity Types
    *   Step 3: Mapping of Binary 1:1 Relation Types
    *   Step 4: Mapping of Binary 1:N Relationship Types.
    *   Step 5: Mapping of Binary M:N Relationship Types.
    *   Step 6: Mapping of Multivalued attributes.
    *   Step 7: Mapping of N-ary Relationship Types.
*   **Mapping EER Model Constructs to Relations**
    *   Step 8: Options for Mapping Specialization or Generalization.
    *   Step 9: Mapping of Union Types (Categories).